Sensitivity


Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002 1

Sensitivity of general circulation model
performance to convective parametrization
March 1997

By D. Gregory

Table of contents

1 . Introduction

2 . The importance of shallow convection

3 . Sensitivity of climate simulations to the parametrization of deep convection

3.1 Mean distribution of precipitation

3.2 Sensitivity of simulated variability

3.3 Impact of differing precipitation distributions

4 . Summary

REFERENCES

1. INTRODUCTION

The paper attempts to describe the sensitivity of aspects of global circulation model (GCM) performance to con-

vective parametrization. This is a difficult task for a number of reasons. Firstly we have to define what is meant by

"performance". From a numerical weather forecasting perspective a model must produces a good estimate of the

three-dimensional structure and evolution of synoptic-scale weather systems. On climate time scales the model

should capture a realistic mean distribution of thermodynamic variables (including cloud cover), wind and surface

precipitation. For coupled ocean–atmosphere modelling the surface fluxes of heat and water vapour need to be cor-

rectly simulated. Also the simulated variability of the atmosphere (from diurnal through to the intraseasonal and

interannual time scale) needs to be well captured. Convective parametrization has a large influence upon all these

areas and it is difficult to make definitive statements covering each area in such a short paper.

Secondly, however, it is difficult to make definitive statements concerning the impact of convection schemes alone

as other parametrizations (for example the boundary-layer scheme), together with the methods used to simulated

resolved motions, also have a impact upon the ability of atmospheric models to simulated the features of the general

circulation referred to above. Even if identical convection schemes were used in two GCMs in which other proc-

esses were represented in a substantially different manner, it would not be certain that the distribution of precipi-

tation simulated, together with other features of the mean climate, would be similar. However, as will be illustrated

below, some features of GCM simulations appear well correlated with certain convective processes.

This paper will be limited to illustrating areas where simulations of the global circulation are known to be sensitive

to the representation of convection, emphasing the mean climate and variability of the tropics. Reference will be

mainly made to recent studies using the climate version of the UK Meterological Office (UKMO) Unified Model



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

2 Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002

(UM) (described briefly by Gregory and Morris (1996) and having a horizontal resolution of 2.5 x 3.75o latitude–

longitude and 19 levels) and the T63 31-level configuration of a recent version of the ECMWF model (CY14R3).

Other studies will also be referred to but only a summary of relevant results is provided; the reader is referred to

the original material for greater details.

2. THE IMPORTANCE OF SHALLOW CONVECTION

When convection on a global scale is discussed it is often deep convection in the tropics that receives the greatest

attention. Much recent work on the development of improved representations of convection for use in GCMs has

concentrated upon this area. However, shallow convection also plays an important role in global circulation, and

global simulations are sensitive to the manner in which it is parametrized. Although several mass-flux parametri-

zations represent shallow convection (Tiedtke 1989; Gregory and Rowntree 1990), comparatively less attention

has been given to considering the effects of such processes.

To illustrate this sensitivity, Fig. 1 shows a latitude–height cross-section of zonal-mean omega for July 1987 from

two 40-day integrations carried out using the ECMWF model, one with shallow convection parametrized by a

mass-flux scheme, the second with no parametrization of shallow convection, together with the estimate of zonal-

mean omega from the ECMWF ReAnalysis (ERA). With shallow convection neglected, the maximum intensity

of the ascending branch of the Hadley circulation in the tropics is reduced and its lateral extent broadened. Other

consequences of neglecting shallow-convective processes are a moistening of the boundary layer in the tropics and

subtropics, drying of the free troposphere, a reduction in surface evaporation and large increases in boundary-layer

cloud in the tropics and subtropics. These changes come about as shallow convection plays a crucial role in ven-

tilating the boundary layer in the trade-wind regions, removing moisture from the boundary layer into the free trop-

osphere. With the removal of shallow convection and a drier free troposphere in the descending branches of the

Hadley circulation, cooling by infrared radiation is reduced, causing the intensity of the divergent circulation of the

equatorial regions to reduce.



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002 3

Figure  1. Height–latitude cross-sections of zonal-mean omega (mPa/s) for July 1987 from T63/L31 simulations

of the ECMWF model (CY14R3) starting on 20 June 1987 (a) with shallow convection included into the

convection scheme, (b) shallow convection switched off in the convection scheme and (c) from the ECMWF

ReAnalysis.

A key parameter in a parametrization of shallow convection is the amount of saturated air which is transported

through the inversion. Fig. 2 (from Tiedtke 1989) shows single-column simulations based upon ASTEX data in

which the amount of mass transported through the inversion by convection (as measured by the parameter - the

fraction of mass within convection in the last buoyant layer that is allowed to ascend into the inversion layer) is

varied. Large changes in the intensity of the hydrolapse and temperature inversion are seen as is varied, with

the boundary layer becoming moister and the inversion stronger when less of the updraught is detrained into the

inversion layer. This is a consequence of less cloud water being available to cool and moisten the inversion layer

by evaporation, balancing the warming and drying effects of large-scale subsidence. Note that removal shallow

convection results in a very intense inversion and hydrolapse. Detailed observational studies of this processes are

not available and current parametrizations are adjusted to achieve a realistic tropical circulation. However Large

Eddy Simulation (LES) models are now able to capture many features of shallow convection and analysis of such

detailed models across a variety of situations may be valuable for refining this area.

β

β



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

4 Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002

Figure  2. Single-column model simulations for ASTEX illustrating impact of the variation of the fraction of

updraught mass flux in the last buoyant layer allowed to penetrate the inversion ( ) upon boundary layer and

inversion structure.

3. SENSITIVITY OF CLIMATE SIMULATIONS TO THE PARAMETRIZATION OF DEEP CONVEC-
TION

3.1  Mean distribution of precipitation

Several authors have recognised that different convection schemes can have a tendency to produce different spatial

patterns of precipitation, especially in the tropics. For example Hess et al. (1993) compared aqua-planet simula-

tions using a T42 version of the NCAR Community Climate Model (CCM1) using a moist convective adjustment

scheme and Kuo type scheme, which uses moisture convergence to determine the location and intensity of convec-

tion. They found that the Kuo scheme produced a double maximum of precipitation straddling the equator, with

precipitation maxima at 10oN/S, while using the moist convective adjustment scheme gave a single maximum of

precipitation on the equator. Several other studies have indicated a similar sensitivity. Plots of mean December/

January/February (DJF) precipitation for 1979–1988 from the Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project (AMIP

β



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002 5

- Gates (1992)) presented by Slingo et al. (1996) show that, in the majority of GCMs using some form of moisture

convergence to estimate the location and intensity of deep convection, a double ITCZ structure develops over the

west Pacific.

Figure  3. December/January/February precipitation from three-year simulations of the UKMO Unified Model

(using climatological SSTs) with a mass-flux convection scheme (a) without and (b) with downdraughts.

Recent studies with the climate version of the UKMO Unified Model have also suggested that, apart from refer-

ences to moisture convergence made by a convection scheme, several other factors also influence the distribution

of precipitation. Fig. 3 shows the impact of including the effects of convective-scale downdraught processes into

the convection scheme of Gregory and Rowntree (1990) upon the distribution of simulated precipitation during

DJF (3-year mean). In the Pacific a strong ITCZ north of the equator is weakened with the introduction of down-

draughts, with a shift of precipitation into the south Pacific Convergence Zone (SPCZ) and a reduced double max-

imum in precipitation straddling the equator in the Indian Ocean and west Pacific, in better agreement with

observations. Monsoon circulations over the tropical continents are also intensified with the introduction of con-

vective downdraughts, leading to improved rainfall amounts over tropical land masses. It should be noted that the

convection scheme used (Gregory and Rowntree 1990) only uses instability to determine the location of convection

and its intensity, i.e. no reference is made to the presence of moisture convergence as in the Kuo scheme.

Downgradient momentum transports can also affect the mean climatology of precipitation simulated by a GCM.

Fig. 4 shows DJF precipitation from two annual cycle simulations performed with the UKMO Unified Model (In-

ness and Gregory 1996), one in which the vertical transport of horizontal momentum is neglected (10-year mean),



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

6 Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002

the second in which it is included (3-year mean) using the scheme described by Gregory et al. (1996). Inclusion

of momentum transports leads to a reduction in precipitation rates in the SPCZ and increased rainfall in the ITCZ

north of the equator in the Pacific. A greater tendency to form a split ITCZ is noted in both the Indian Ocean and

west Pacific. It is should be noted that the convection scheme used in these simulations contains the downdraught

parametrization discussed above, indicating the large sensitivity to details of the convection scheme that the proc-

esses determining the distribution of precipitation have.

Figure  4. December/January/February precipitation for simulations of the UKMO Unified Model (using

climatological SSTs) (a) without convective momentum  transports (10-year mean) and (b) with convective

momentum transports (3-year mean).

The reasons for this large model sensitivity is not well established. Hess et al. (1993) suggested that the ability of

a model to represent transient synoptic waves played a role in organising the precipitation maximum off the equa-

tor. They found that in simulations using a Kuo type convection scheme, convergence due to transient eddies was

a maximum off the equator. When a moist convective adjustment scheme was used, synoptic eddies were not well

simulated. However, Inness and Gregory (1996) show that inclusion of convective momentum transports leads to

a reduction of transient activity in the central Pacific, together with a greater tendency to splitting the ITCZ, perhaps

suggesting that variability has less of a role in organising such precipitation patterns. However, there may be a

strong link between the ability of a model to simulate the distribution of tropical precipitation accurately and its

ability to simulate observed variability on a variety of time scales.



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002 7

As commented upon above, there is a similarity in the tropical precipitation pattern in the UKMO Unified Model

when either downdraught processes are neglected or downgradient convective momentum transports included. In

both cases the band of precipitation located near the Philippines is excessive compared with observations and is

associated with a depression track due to the model’s attempt to simulated tropical depressions that tend to move

in a manner similar to tropical cyclones, although being of much weaker intensity due to the coarse resolution of

the model. Downdraughts have a tendency to cool and dry the convective subcloud layer, which may inhibit the

formation of tropical depressions within the model by delaying the growth of intense convection. Hence, neglect

of such processes may enhance the synoptic variability within the model and, where this occurs, enhance precipi-

tation amounts.

Analysis of the simulations with and without convective momentum transports (Gregory et al. 1996) indicates that

the inclusion of momentum transports decreases the vertical shear in the west Pacific north of the equator, a situa-

tion which may favour the formation of tropical depressions. Indeed, as commented upon later (figure 6a), synoptic

variability increases in vicinity of the Philippines when convective momentum transports are included together

with mean precipitation. These "observations" of model sensitivity may suggest that the pattern of mean precipi-

tation simulated by a GCM may be closely tied to a models ability to simulate accurately tropical variability. Fur-

ther comments will be made regarding this subject in the next section.

3.2  Sensitivity of simulated variability

Recent studies of GCM simulations have demonstrated that simulated variability in the tropics on a wide range of

time scales is sensitive to the convection scheme employed. Slingo et al. (1994) presents results from perpetual

January simulations of the UGAMP GCM (based upon a version of the ECMWF model) using both a Kuo and

Betts–Miller scheme. They found that the Betts–Miller scheme gave a more realistic distribution of precipitation,

with a maximum on the equator over the west Pacific anda narrow ITCZ, while the Kuo scheme gave a very much

weaker ITCZ, with precipitation being broadly distributed over the tropical oceans. Associated with this, it was

found that higher levels of variability were found in the tropics using the Betts–Miller scheme from time scales

ranging from those associated with synoptic-scale systems (2–6 days) to intraseasonal periods (30–70 days).

This contrasting behaviour was attributed by Slingo et al. (1994) to the different ways the two schemes operated.

For the Kuo scheme used in their study, the only criterion for convection to occur if the profile is conditionally un-

stable is that moisture convergence is present. In the tropics and subtropics this condition is almost always satisfied

due to surface evaporation, and so the Kuo scheme continually acts, giving low instantaneous precipitation rates.

With the Betts–Miller scheme, for deep convection to occur the integrated moisture within a column of the atmos-

phere has to be sufficient to support precipitation. This leads to a delay in the onset of precipitation events and a

more intermittent response of the convection. Slingo et al. (1994) commented that, if the Kuo scheme was prevent-

ed from operating until the water in the column exceeds a critical value (as in the BMRC GCM—McAvaney et al.

(1991)), then as the fraction of the moisture convergence precipitated by convection increases with relative humid-

ity, spurious rainfall in the subtropics would be eliminated and more intense rainfall events generated in the deep

tropics.  This may lead to a better mean climate and simulation of variability.

However the link between closure and simulation of variability is complicated. Fig. 5 compares the variance of

850 mb relative vorticity for DJF 1987/88 from a simulation using a recent version of the ECMWF model (at T63

resolution) with that estimated from the ECMWF ReAnalysis data (ERA - at T106 resolution). The ECMWF mod-



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

8 Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002

el uses a mass-flux convection scheme (Tiedtke 1989) in which the mass flux at cloud base is linked to moisture

convergence below cloud base. Also, the growth of the mass flux in the vertical in the lower half of the troposphere

is linked to the moisture convergence into the column of the atmosphere. Hence, the location of convective activity

and its intensity are strongly linked to the presence of moisture convergence. However, unlike the Kuo scheme

used by Slingo et al. (1996), the location of deep convection is determined by moisture convergence due to atmos-

pheric motion being greater than surface evaporation rather than that the sum of convergence and surface evapora-

tion implying a moistening of a column of the model. Although errors can be seen in the spatial patterns of

variability within the tropics in the model simulation (for example in the west Pacific, associated with errors in the

mean distribution of precipitation - a strong ITCZ north of the equator in the Pacific and weak SPCZ) the level of

variability within the ITCZ is comparable to that from the reanalysis (for example, in the southern Indian Ocean).

This contrasts from results presented by Nordeng (1994) which suggested that an earlier version of the ECMWF

model (T63/19 levels) with the same convection scheme underestimated tropical variability, especially in the west

Pacific. However, many other parts of the mode’ls dynamics and physical parametrizations have changed since this

study, indicating that the level of variability simulated is not a function of the convection scheme alone.

Figure  5. Mean variance of 850 mb relative vorticity for December/January/February 1987/88 for the tropics

from (a) ECMWF ReAnalysis and( b) a 120-day T63/L31 simulation (from 1 Nov 1987) using version CY14R4

of the ECMWF model.

Simulated variability is also affected by the parametrization of convective momentum transports. Inness and Gre-

goy (1996) show that inclusion of such transports into the UKMO Unified Model changes not only the mean pre-

cipitation pattern (as shown in Fig. 4 above) but also the simulated variability from synoptic to intraseasonal time

scale. Fig. 6 shows the variance of outgoing long-wave radiation on synoptic (2–10 days) and intraseasonal (25–

70 days) time scales for the tropics (annual means) from two 3-year simulations, one without convective momen-

tum transports, the other with them included. Synoptic variability is generally reduced along the ITCZ of the cen-

tral and eastern Pacific and Atlantic oceans although, as noted earlier, it is increased in the west Pacific near the

Philippines.



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002 9

A similar sensitivity to convective momentum transports is seen in the ECMWF model, with simulated variability

across the Pacific reducing when convective momentum transports are included into the model. However, near the

Philippines, variability is increased in DJF. As noted earlier, this is associated with greater precipitation in both

models in this region, indicating a link between variability and mean precipitation. This presence of a strong band

of precipitation north of the equator in this region is not supported by observations and may suggest that counter-

gradient transports associated with organised convective systems, not accounted for in the current momentum-

transport parametrization, may play a role in regulating the formation of tropical depressions in this region. How-

ever, the impact of convective-scale downdraught processes discussed previously suggests that interactions be-

tween convection and the subcloud layer and ocean surface may also be important.

Fig. 6 also shows a weakening of the intraseasonal oscillation simulated by the Unified Model when convective

momentum transports are included. Inness and Gregory (1994) also note that the neglect of downdraught processes

weakens the strength of the intraseasonal oscillation. This is correlated with a stronger ITCZ north of the equator,

weaker SPCZ and a greater tendency to split the ITCZ in DJF, bringing the model into poorer agreement with ob-

servations and an increased easterly bias in the seasonal cycle of the upper level flow of the tropics. Slingo et al.

(1996), in a study of the ability of 15 different GCMs to simulate intraseasonal variability, note that those with a

realistic distribution of precipitation with respect to SST in the Pacific and a unbiased seasonal cycle in tropical

upper-level winds (associated with the latitudinal movement of convection) tended to give a strong signal at intra-

seasonal time scales in tropical wind fields. The results from the UKMO model referred to here would corroborate

this observation, indicating a link between the correct simulation of the mean climate and its seasonal variation

with atmospheric variability.

3.3  Impact of differing precipitation distributions

It is important to ask whether such errors in precipitation patterns play a significant role in causing model system-

atic error in global circulation. A poor distribution of surface precipitation will affect surface fluxes and so impact

upon the ability of coupled atmosphere–ocean models to simulated climate. However, the study of Ferranti et al.

(1994) carried out using an earlier version of the ECMWF model (T42/19 levels) suggests that differences in the

structure of convective activity in the Pacific is of more direct importance to the accurate simulation of atmospheric

flow in the tropics and mid latitudes. This study considers the response of model systematic error to idealised sea

surface temperature anomalies. The mean DJF precipitation distribution simulated by this earlier version of the

ECMWF model showed a split ITCZ structure over the west and central Pacific, with a minimum of precipitation

on the equator (Fig. 7 (a)), contrasting with observations which suggest a maximum on the equator. Increasing the

SSTs in the vicinity of the equator by 2 K between 110oE and 150oE increased precipitation locally on the equator

up to 16 mm/day (Fig. 7 (b)). Associated with this response is a strengthening of the upper-level westerly flow in

the upper troposphere of the central and west Pacific, reducing an easterly bias in the control simulation (Fig. 8 ).



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

10 Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002

Figure  6. Annual-mean variance of outgoing long-wave radiation (3-year mean) for time periods (a) and (b)

between 2 and 10 days, and (c) and (d) 25 and 70 days, for simulations of the UKMO Unified Model (a) and (c)

without and (b) and (d) with convective momentum transports.



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002 11

Figure 7. (a) December/January/February average precipitation using climatological SSTs (from an ensemble of

5 simulations) using a T63/L19 version of the ECMWF model, and (b) December/January/February precipitation

response to an Indonesian SST anomaly (described in text).

The presence of westerly winds in the east Pacific is important for the interaction of the tropics and mid latitudes,

with Rossby waves propagating northwards into the north Atlantic sector leading the to "PNA" pattern associated

with blocking activity over Europe. Comparing the Tibaldi blocking index (Tibaldi and Molenti 1990) for the con-

trol and Pacific SST anomaly simulations (averaged over an ensemble of 6 simulations started 1 day apart) with

that estimated from model analyses shows more realistic blocking occurrence in both Pacific and Atlantic when

convection is forced to occur over the equator in the west Pacific. Similar sensitivity has been noted in an experi-

ment of similar design with the climate version of the UKMO Unified Model (R. Stratton, personal communica-

tion) and leading one to speculate that a convection schemes that produce a precipitation pattern with a maximum

on the equator of the west Pacific might lead to a better simulation by a GCM of the interaction between the tropics

and mid latitudes.



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

12 Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002

Figure 8. (a) December/January/February zonal-mean cross-section of systematic error in zonal-mean wind from

an ensemble of five 120-day simulations using climatological SSTs, and (b) December/January/February zonal-

mean cross-section of the response of zonal wind to an Indonesian SST anomaly.

4. SUMMARY

This paper has attempted to review the impact of convection upon the ability of convection to simulate accurately

aspects of the general circulation. As stated in the introduction, it has not attempted to be comprehensive but has

concentrated upon the circulation and variability of the tropics, although possible consequences of errors there for

mid-latitude circulations have been briefly commented upon. It is clear that details of the methods used to para-

metrize both deep and shallow convection have a large impact upon GCM performance. However, the exact details

of such sensitivity are somewhat contradictory at times, with different models showing different sensitivities.

Mechanisms to account for these sensitivities are not understood, being difficult to evaluate within the context of

a fully interactive global model. However, similarities between the sensitivity of the UKMO Unified Model and a

recent version of the ECMWF model to processes such as convective momentum transports has been noted.

Summarising those points with which there is some agreement between various studies;

1) Shallow convective parametrizations plays a key role in the maintenance of the Hadley circulation

in GCMs and the global hydrological cycle.

2) Convection schemes that use moisture convergence to determine the location and intensity of deep

convection have a detrimental impact upon the mean distribution of tropical precipitation, tending

to split the ITCZ in the west Pacific, which may lead to large errors in the simulated circulation of

the tropics and mid latitudes. However, other factors, such as the neglect of convective

downdraughts and the inclusion of momentum transports in GCMs, may lead to similar errors.



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002 13

3) Various convection schemes have impact upon the variability of the tropical atmosphere, although it

is too simplistic to conclude that moisture-convergence type schemes produce weaker levels of

variability. However, it is clear that the ability of a GCM to capture details of atmospheric

variability accurately is an important test of a parametrization scheme. Sensitivity studies presented

above also tend to suggest that the simulation of a correct distribution of precipitation may be

coupled with a model’s ability to provide a realistic simulation of atmospheric variability.

4) Down-gradient transport of horizontal momentum in the vertical by convection reduces model wind

errors in the tropics and also (generally) tropical variability on a broad range of time scales.

However, in certain regions errors in the precipitation distribution are enhanced by such processes,

perhaps indicating the need to consider counter-gradient momentum transports associated with

organised convection in some regions (for example the west Pacific).

REFERENCES

Ferranti, L., Molteni, F. and Palmer, T.N. (1994) Impact of localised tropical and extratropical SST anomalies in

ensembles of seasonal GCM integrations, QJR. Meteorol. Soc. 120, 1613-1646

Gates, W.L. (1992) AMIP : The Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project, Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 73, 1962-
1970

Gregory, D. and Morris, D. (1996) The sensitivity of climate simulations to the specification of mixed phase clouds,

Clim. Dyn. 12, 641-651

Gregory, D. and Rowntree, P.R. (1990) A mass flux convection scheme with representation of cloud ensemble char-

acteristics and stability dependent closure, Mon. Wea. Rev. 118, 1483-1506

Gregory, D., Kershaw, R. and Inness, P.M. (1996) Parametrization of momentum transports by convection II : Tests

in single column and general circulation models, accepted for publication in QJR. Meteorol. Soc.

Hess, P.G., Battisti, D.S. and Rasch, P.J. (1993) The maintenance of the intertropical convergence zones and large-

scale tropical circulation on a water covered earth, J. Atmos. Sci. 50, 691-713

Inness, P.M. and Gregory, D. (1994) Simulation of the Indian monsoon and tropical intraseasonal variability by a

general circulation model, Climate Research Technical Note No. 52, Hadley Centre, Meteorological Office, Lon-

don Road, Bracknell, Berks, United Kingdom

Inness, P.M. and Gregory, D. (1996) Aspects of the intraseasonal oscillation simulated by the Hadley Centre at-

mospheric model, submitted to Clim. Dyn.

McAvaney, B.J., Fraser, J.R., Hart, T.L., Rikus, L.J., Bourke, W.P., Naughton, M.J., and Mullenmeister, P. (1991)

Circulation statistics from a non-dirurnal seasonal simulation with the BMRC atmospheric GCM : R21L19, BMRC

Research Report No.29, Beaureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Melbourne, Australia

Nordeng, T.E. (1994) Extended versions of the convection parametrization scheme at ECMWF and their impact

upon the mean climate and transient activity of the model in the tropics, Research Department Technical Memo-

randum No. 206, ECMWF, Shinfield Park, Reading, Berks, United Kingdom

Slingo, J.M., Blackburn, M., Betts, A., Brugge, R., Hoskins, B.J., Miller, M.J., Steenman-Clark, L. and Thurburn,

J. (1994) Mean climate and transience in the tropics of the UGAMP GCM : Sensitivity to convective parametriza-

tion, QJR. Meteorol. Soc., 120, 881-922

Slingo, J.M., Sperber, K.R., Boyle, J.S., Ceron, J.-P., Dix, M., Dugas, B., Ebisuzaki, W., Fyfe, J., Gregory, D., Guer-



Sensitivity of general circulation model performance to convective parametrization

14 Meteorological Training Course Lecture Series

 ECMWF, 2002

emy, J.-F., Hack, J., Harzallah, A., Inness, P., Kitoh, A., Lau, W.K.-M., McAvaney, B., Madden, R., Matthews, A.,

Palmer, T.N., Park, C.-K., Randall, D. and Renno, N. (1996) Intraseasonal oscillations in 15 atmospheric general

circulation models : results from an AMIP diagnostic subproject, Clim. Dyn. 12, 325-357

Tiedtke, M. (1989) A comprehensive mass flux scheme for cumulus parametrization in large-scale models, Mon.

Wea. Rev. 117, 1779-1800

Tibaldi, S. and Molenti, F. (1990)  On the operational predictability of blocking, Tellus 42A, 343-365